Query updates (#7338)
fishtown-analytics/docs.getdbt.com: website/docs/docs/explore/access-dbt-insights.md

image: /img/docs/dbt-insights/insights-chart.jpg

> ---

Reviewer: @matthewshaver and @dave-connors-3 make sure to change all of the "unlisted: true" to false

Author: Will take this action on the internal repo for the 28th

> # Access the dbt Insights interface <Lifecycle status="beta,managed,managed_plus" />

Reviewer 2: will we swap to preview next week?

Author: Yes! Will take this action on our internal repo

    ```

### Use dbt Copilot 
To make things easier, [use <Constant name="copilot" />](/docs/cloud/use-dbt-copilot#build-queries) to save time and explore other ways to analyze the data. <Constant name="copilot" /> can help you quickly update the query or generate a new one based on your prompt.

1. Click the **<Constant name="copilot" />** icon in the Query console sidebar to open the prompt box.  

> 2. Enters your prompt in natural language and ask for a yearly breakdown of unique customers and total revenue. Then click **Submit**.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Enter your prompt in natural language and ask for a yearly breakdown of unique customers and total revenue. Then click **Submit**.
```

- [View metadata and query details](#view-details) in the **Details** tab
- [Visualize results](#chart-results) in the **Chart** tab
- Check the [**Query history**](#query-history) for status and past runs
- Use [**<Constant name="explorer" />**](#use-dbt-explorer) to explore model lineage and context
- If you want to save the query, you can click **Bookmark** in the [query console menu](/docs/explore/navigate-dbt-insights#query-console-menu) to save it for future reference.

:::tip Want to turn a query into a model?
You can access the [<Constant name="cloud_ide" />](/docs/cloud/dbt-cloud-ide/develop-in-the-cloud) or [<Constant name="visual_editor" />](/docs/cloud/canvas) from the [Query console menu](/docs/explore/navigate-dbt-insights#query-console-menu) to promote your SQL into a reusable dbt model &mdash; all within <Constant name="cloud" />!
:::

### View results

Using the same example, you can perform some exploratory data analysis by running the query and:

- Viewing results in **Results** tab &mdash; View the paginated results of the query.
- Sorting results &mdash; Click on the column header to sort the results by that column.

> - Exporting to CSV &mdash; On the top right of the table, click the three-dot ellipsis (`...`) button and select **Export to CSV** to export the dataset.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Exporting to CSV &mdash; On the top right of the table, click the download button to export the dataset.
```

<Lightbox src="/img/docs/dbt-insights/insights-export-csv.png" width="95%" title="dbt Insights Export to CSV" />

### View details
View the details of the query by clicking on the **Details** tab:

> - **Query metadata** &mdash; <Constant name="copilot" /> AI-generated title and description, the supplied SQL, and corresponding compiled SQL.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Query metadata** &mdash; <Constant name="copilot" />-generated title and description, the supplied SQL, and corresponding compiled SQL.
```

- **Connection details** &mdash; Relevant data platform connection information.
- **Query details** &mdash; Query duration, status, column count, row count.

<Lightbox src="/img/docs/dbt-insights/insights-details.png" width="95%" title="dbt Insights Details tab" />

### Chart results

Visualize the chart results of the query by clicking on the **Chart** tab to:
- Select the chart type using the chart icon.
- Choose from **line chart, bar chart, or scatterplot**.

> - Select the axis and columns to visualize using the **Chart settings** icon.

Reviewer 2: can we update this screenshot as well? looks like this one got missed

Author: Yup! Got it

### Query history

View the history of queries and their statuses (All, Success, Error, or Pending) using the **Query history** icon:
- Select a query to re-run to view the results. 

> - Ssearch for past queries and filter by status.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Search for past queries and filter by status.
```

> - For each query, click on the ellipsis **(`...`)** button to open the query in a new tab or copy the SQL.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

- Same search capabilities as <Constant name="explorer" />
- Allows users to narrow down displayed objects by type
- Hyperlink from SQL code `ref` to the corresponding Explorer page
- View assets in more detail by opening with the full <Constant name="explorer" /> experience or open them in <Constant name="copilot" />.

To access <Constant name="explorer" />, click on the **<Constant name="explorer" />** icon in the [Query console sidebar menu](/docs/explore/navigate-dbt-insights#query-console-sidebar-menu).

<Lightbox src="/img/docs/dbt-insights/insights-explorer.png" width="90%" title="dbt Insights integrated with dbt Explorer" />

## Bookmark your queries

Insights offers a robust bookmark feature for quickly finding the queries you use most. There's also an option to share bookmarks with other dbt users (and have them share with you). Click the bookmark icon in a query to add it to your list!

- Click the **bookmark icon** on the right menu to manage your bookmarked queries. You can view your personal and shared queries

>     <Lightbox src="/img/docs/dbt-insights/manage-bookmarks.png" width="90%" title="Manage your query bookmarks" />

Author: ```suggestion

    <Lightbox src="/img/docs/dbt-insights/manage-bookmarks.png" width="90%" title="Manage your query bookmarks" />
    
```

### Use dbt Explorer

> Access [<Constant name="explorer" />](/docs/explore/explore-projects) directly in <Constant name="query_page" /> to view the project lineage and project resources with access to tables, columns, metrics, and dimensions, and more — all integrated in the <Constant name="query_page" /> interface. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Access [<Constant name="explorer" />](/docs/explore/explore-projects) directly in <Constant name="query_page" /> to view project resources such as models, columns, metrics, and dimensions, and more — all integrated in the <Constant name="query_page" /> interface. 
```

> This integrated view allows you and your users to maintain their query workflow, while getting more context on models, semantic models, metrics, macros, and more. The integrated <Constant name="explorer" /> view comes with:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This integrated view allows you and your users to maintain your query workflow, while getting more context on models, semantic models, metrics, macros, and more. The integrated <Constant name="explorer" /> view comes with:
```

- View assets in more detail by opening with the full <Constant name="explorer" /> experience or open them in <Constant name="copilot" />.

To access <Constant name="explorer" />, click on the **<Constant name="explorer" />** icon in the [Query console sidebar menu](/docs/explore/navigate-dbt-insights#query-console-sidebar-menu).

<Lightbox src="/img/docs/dbt-insights/insights-explorer.png" width="90%" title="dbt Insights integrated with dbt Explorer" />

## Bookmark your queries

Insights offers a robust bookmark feature for quickly finding the queries you use most. There's also an option to share bookmarks with other dbt users (and have them share with you). Click the bookmark icon in a query to add it to your list!

- Click the **bookmark icon** on the right menu to manage your bookmarked queries. You can view your personal and shared queries
    <Lightbox src="/img/docs/dbt-insights/manage-bookmarks.png" width="90%" title="Manage your query bookmarks" />
- View bookmark details including description and creation date in the **Overview** tab.
- View the bookmarks history in the **Version history** tab. Click a version to compare it the current and view changes. 

> 

Reviewer 2: <img width="863" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/8c07bea9-7b24-4cea-85f7-b92a7be64164" />
seeing a missing / bogus image here

Reviewer 2: might just need whitespace above + below the codeblock

## Considerations 

> - <Constant name="query_page" /> uses your development credentials to query. You have the ability to query against any object in any environment.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- <Constant name="query_page" /> uses your development credentials to query. You have the ability to query against any object in your data warehouse that is accessible using your development credentials. 
```
